you're listening to a teaching from Reality LA.
He's God.
Well, good morning church.
If I haven't gotten to meet you yet, like Jeremy said, my name is Goodwin.
And I am one of the elders here at Reality LA.
We are in a sermon series on the book of Acts.
And so if you have your Bibles with you this morning, you can meet me in Acts chapter 17.
It's Acts chapter 17.
And the book of Acts is one of the most exciting and dynamic books in the Bible.
And it takes place right after the life, death, resurrection, and ascension of Jesus.
And contained within the 28 chapters of Acts is an account of the absolutely explosive growth of the early church.
You see, against overwhelming odds, in the face of unimaginable persecution, we've been learning that the early church has been an unstoppable movement.
A church that was both growing where they were and also going where they were not.
See, this was a community marked by spirit-filled boldness, of people that were willing to lay down their lives for one another while simultaneously leaving the comforts of home to seek and to save the lost.
And as we make our way through these stories of the church on mission, the author Luke provides us with a table of contents of sorts in Acts 1-8.
When right before his ascension, Jesus tells his disciples that they will receive power
when the Holy Spirit comes upon them.
And he tells them that they will be his witnesses in Jerusalem, in all Judea and Samaria, and even to the ends of the earth.
And so we see right from the beginning, our role as followers of Jesus is to be a witness to those around us.
And our responsibility is to testify to the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth to an ever-increasing scope, proclaiming the good news of Jesus, not just to one nation,
but to all nations.
And because the Word of God does not return void, but rather it accomplishes that for which God purposed it, that's exactly what we see in the book of Acts.
In the power of the Holy Spirit, by the testimony of witness, after witness, after witness, we see the family of God growing and expanding past Jerusalem, past all of Judea ends to Mary, and by the time Acts 17 rolls around, it's now on its way to the ends,
of the earth.
And so we'll pick up this incredible story in Acts 17 this morning, and we will be in verses one through nine.
I'll read it for us in its entirety, and then I'll pray for our time in the word this morning.
Acts 17, one through nine says this.
Now, when they had passed through Amphiphilus, in Apollania, they came to Thessalonica, where there was a synagogue of the Jews.
And Paul went in as was his custom.
And on three Sabbath days, he reasoned with them from the scriptures, explaining and proving that it was necessary for the Christ to suffer and to rise from the dead.
Saying, this Jesus, whom I proclaim to you is the Christ.
Verse four, and some of them were persuaded and joined Paul and Silas as did a great many of the devout Greeks and not a few of the leading women.
But the Jews were jealous.
And taking some wicked men of the rabble, they formed a mob, set the city in an uproar and attacked the house of Jason, seeking to bring them out to the crowd.
Verse six, and when they could not find them, they dragged Jason and some of the brothers before the city authorities shouting, these men who have turned the world upside down have come here also.
And Jason has received them, and they are all acting against the decrees of Caesar, saying that there is another king, Jesus.
And the people and the city authorities were disturbed when they had heard these things.
And when they had taken money as security from Jason and the rest, they let them go.
This is the word of the Lord.
Let's pray.
Jesus, we thank you that you are a God who keeps your promises, that you are a man of your word.
You never ever lie.
And so we can count on you to be faithful to what you have said.
And so as we look at this story in Acts this morning, I pray that we would be encouraged and we'd be filled with hope knowing that the gospel can take root even in the hardest of soils.
So would you give us fresh vision for what you can do as we seek your will in your kingdom here in Los Angeles as it is in heaven?
Do you fill us with a renewed sense of resolve?
that in the power of the Holy Spirit, would you be made much of in our gathering today?
We say together that we love you.
We pray all these things in the mighty name of Jesus and all God's people said, amen.
Amen.
Well, let me begin this morning by telling you a true story from history.
And I will say at the outset that it does come from a time of conflict.
And so some of the details can be rightly unsettling for us.
But the year was 1992 and in southeastern Europe,
The republics that made up the former Yugoslavia were at war.
And after Bosnia and Herzegovina declared its independence from Yugoslavia, the dissenting Bosnia Serb forces immediately encircled the capital city of Sarajevo, occupying the surrounding mountains and trapping the residents inside the city walls in hopes of crippling this newly independent government.
would later be known as the siege of Sarajevo.
The city would be cut off from food and electricity, gas and water for 1,425 days.
All the while its residents would be pummeled by an average of 329 mortar shells each and every day.
What was once a vibrant, thriving capital city was quickly reduced to rubble.
But the citizens living in fear of
bombs and snipers.
Nights in the city became pitch black.
The only light coming from the orange glow of buildings on fire.
And in the months and years of the siege, death and destruction would become the tragic norm for the city of Sarajevo.
a norm highlighted on May 27th, 1992 when a mortar shell exploded right in the middle of a group of civilians waiting in line for bread at one of the city's last remaining bakeries, instantly killing 22 people and wounding hundreds more.
These were mothers, fathers, grandmothers and grandfathers waiting in line with empty bags, just waiting for a simple loaf of bread to feed their families.
And the horrifying picture of this scene would become one of the defining images of the conflict, underscoring once again mankind's potential for cruelty and destruction.
And yet, it was against this backdrop of debris and wreckage that an incredible act of beauty and resistance was put on display.
You see the very next day, in the same bakery where the flower was stained red with blood,
A man named Vedron Smilovitch would make his way across the rubble, and he would sit in the middle of the hollowed-out building.
He was dressed in a crisp black ticido with full formal evening tails, and he would take out his cello.
He would tune it.
He would slowly begin to play albanones adagio in G minor.
You see, smile of it was the principal cellist for the Sarajevo Opera Orchestra.
And he decided that his city needed to hear a different tune.
That in the cacophony of fear and anxiety and despair and death, that he would play an alternate song of beauty and hope and resilience and life.
And over the next 22 days, one day for each image bear who died in the bread line massacre,
Smile of it would sit and play.
A small but powerfully subversive act that lifted the people's eyes and ears to a different world while sitting amongst the chaos and confusion of their present world.
When a BBC reporter asked him if he was crazy for playing his cello while his city was bombed and the threat of snipers loomed over him.
Smile of it simply replied, you asked me am I crazy for playing the cello?
Why do you not ask if they are crazy for shelling Sarajeville?
You see, in the middle of a world turned upside down.
A time when death and destruction and despair were the norm, smile of it seemed crazy for pointing to a different reality.
Smile of it seemed crazy for playing an alternate song.
He seemed crazy for standing against the prevailing patterns of living, crazy for resisting against the status quo of culture.
But in actuality, he was just turning a crazy world right side up.
Smile of it would come to be known as the cellist of Sarajevo.
And I tell you the story because that's the picture I often think of when I pray for you guys.
I pray that we would be a people who bring the beauty of Christ into broken places.
I pray that we would be a people who don't run away from the chaos and confusing of our culture, but instead that we would be a people who root ourselves in our culture, dreaming of ways that we can creatively and redemptively work towards the peace and prosperity of our city.
I pray that we would be a people who turn our crazy world right side up.
Women and men who play a different tune.
The kind of church that seeks to make the city of angels look more like the kingdom of God.
And as we look to our passage in Acts 17, this is exactly what Paul and Silas do as they come to the city of Thessalonica.
Three points I want to dive deeper into this morning as we read Luke's journal entry of their time in Thessalonica.
And it's that as witnesses of Jesus, Paul and Silas preach a different king.
They participate in a different kingdom.
And lastly, they practice a different way of life.
Let's look at one of these, each of these one at a time.
So first of all, Paul and Silas preach a different king.
Okay, reading again in verse one says this, now when they had passed through and fifthalists in Apollania, they came to Thessalonica where there was a synagogue of the Jews.
And Paul went in, okay, don't miss this, it says, as was his custom.
Okay, don't miss this church, engaging in spiritual conversations and proclaiming the good news of Jesus was a normative practice for Paul, and it should be a normative practice for us.
And Paul went in, as was his custom, and on three Sabbath days, or in other words, for about three weeks, he reasoned with them from the scriptures, explaining and proving that it was necessary for the Christ to suffer and to rise from the dead.
saying this Jesus who might proclaim to you is the Christ.
Now pause there.
Okay, how many of you guys know that Christ isn't Jesus' last name?
Right?
In our day and age, we were so used to saying, you know, Jesus Christ this or Jesus Christ that I think we sometimes can forget that Christ isn't Jesus' last name.
Like Jesus' half brothers aren't referred to as James Christ or Joseph Christ, right?
Because Christ isn't a lost name, it's a title.
That's why Paul is saying here that Jesus is the Christ.
And while we as churchgoers in the 21st century might be familiar with the phrase or the idea that Jesus is the Christ, Paul's audience in the first century would have been shocked to hear the words that were coming out of Paul's mouth.
Because listen, to declare that Jesus is the Christ in the middle of a synagogue, to proclaim that Jesus is the Christ in the middle of a bustling Roman city would have been nothing short of scandalous.
It would have been shocking.
It would have been crazy.
Like you guys know that exploding head, mind blown emoji, right?
Like if the first century Thessalonians and Jews could text these started, that's the emoji that they would have been using.
And so to fully comprehend what's going on in Acts 17, we have to put ourselves in their shoes.
And we have to understand that the phrase, Jesus is the Christ.
but it had massive mind-blowing theological implications in their day.
Here's what I mean by that.
We've already established that Christ is in a last name.
It's a title.
And it's simply the Greek translation for the Hebrew word, meaning messiah, or anointed one.
And the thing we have to understand about the first century Jews was that they were a people who had long been conquered and oppressed, and that they had long been waiting
and waiting and waiting and waiting for this promised Messiah, this anointed one to deliver them from their oppression.
And so when Paul shows up in that synagogue, every person in the room would have grown up hearing stories about this coming Messiah who would set everything right.
Everyone would have heard about this anointed one who would come to be a prophet.
someone who was to be God's mouthpiece, speaking truth to power and revealing God's will to his people.
Everyone would have heard about the anointive one who had come to be a priest, someone who was to be an advocate for them, interceding on behalf of God's people and offering sacrifices for their sins.
Everyone would have heard about the anointed one who had come to be a king,
a righteous leader who would deliver the people from their oppressors and usher in a world filled with God's righteousness and justice.
So imagine having grown up listening to all these stories of the coming Messiah and being filled with this desperate yearning and longing for this anointed one to come and set things right and hearing Paul come in and say that Jesus is the Christ.
Paul is saying, Jesus is a Christ in everything that you've heard about this Messiah, everything that you've been looking forward to in this anointed one is true in Jesus.
He is the seed of the woman from Genesis 3, the new Adam who would be obedient in order that we might become righteous.
He's Abraham's offspring from Genesis 12, the one through whom all of the nations would be blessed.
He is the true and better Moses, the one who has come to deliver us out of our slavery and oppression.
He is the son of David who righteously reigns from his everlasting throne.
He is the son of righteousness described in Malachi who comes with healing in his wings.
You see, Paul is saying that Jesus is the prophet that you've been waiting for and he has come to speak God's truth.
Jesus is the priest that you've been yearning for coming to heal the rift between God and man.
Jesus is the king that you've been longing for, defeating the enemies of God and ruling with righteousness and justice.
Jesus is the Christ.
But hold on, Paul says.
See, like with every good story, there's a plot twist.
You see, Jesus is indeed the king,
but he's a different kind of king.
You see, you expected the Messiah to be this military leader who would raise up an army to overthrow the Romans, but instead Jesus told his followers to put away their swords.
You expected the Messiah to restore the temple and to re-establish the religious systems of old, but instead Jesus claimed that he was the temple and that he would be destroyed and raised again in three days.
You expected the Messiah's miracles to amass a large following and to lead to a total geopolitical takeover, but instead it led Jesus to a cross.
You expected the Messiah to exalt and to vindicate the Jews as the chosen nation of God, but instead Jesus dined with sinners.
And He welcomes people of all nations into His family.
So for three weeks Paul reasoned with them from the Scriptures
explaining and proving that it was necessary for the Christ to suffer and to arise from the dead.
So he was essentially telling the Thessalonians, you were right about the king, but you were wrong about his crown.
You were right about the victory, but you were wrong about the weapon.
You were right about the liberation, but you were wrong about who the real enemy is.
See, Paul preached a different king, a crucified king, who instead of crushing the Romans, allowed the Romans to crush him.
And in doing so, he defeated the greater enemy of sin and death.
I love how the author and pastor A.W.
Tozer puts it when he says, if man had his way, the plan of redemption would be an endless and bloody conflict.
In reality, salvation was bought not by Jesus' fist,
by his nail pierced hands, not by muscle, but by love, not by vengeance, but by forgiveness, not by force, but by sacrifice.
Jesus Christ, our Lord, surrendered in order that he might win.
He destroyed his enemies by dying for them and conquered death by allowing death to conquer him.
So first we see that as witnesses of Jesus, Paul and Silas preached a different king.
And as we continue in our passage this morning, we see that they invited the Thessalonians to participate in a different kingdom.
We talked about how proclaiming Jesus as the Christ has massive mind-blowing theological implications.
And now we see that it has massive mind-blowing political and social implications as well.
Picking up in verse four, it says,
And some of them were persuaded and joined Paul and Silas as did a great many of the devout Greeks and not a few of the leading women.
But the Jews were jealous and taking some wicked men of the rabble, they formed a mob, set the city in an uproar, and attacked the house of Jason, seeking to bring them out to the crowd.
Verse six, and when they could not find them, they dragged Jason and some of the brothers before the city authorities shouting, these men who have turned the world upside down have come here also.
And Jason has received them, and they are all acting against the decrees of Caesar, saying that there is another king, Jesus.
You see, the accusation against Paul and the church wasn't only that they were teaching about some weird private religion, it was that they were acting against the public decrees of Caesar, saying that there is another king named Jesus.
See, when they proclaimed Jesus as the Christ, they were not only turning their theology upside down, they were turning their whole societal order upside down, inviting the Thessalonians to be part of a different kingdom altogether.
And again, in order to fully comprehend this, we have to understand the prevailing norms of the times.
The city of Thessalonica in the first century was considered a bastion of Roman allegiance.
It was this commercial capital with systems of economics and governance that all revolved around this idea of loyalty to Caesar.
And so the gospel of Caesar would have been proclaimed by evangelists throughout the city, not just as a religion that they chose, but the very air that they breathed.
In every marketplace, you would see coins with Caesar's face on them, each inscribed with a title, Divi Philius, meaning son of the divine or son of God, which is why Jesus so famously said, rendered a Caesar what is Caesar's when he looked at a Roman coin.
In every town square, there would be statues and monuments put up to commemorate the Savior who brought peace to the Empire through the Roman sword.
And the decrees of Caesar that Paul was accused of acting against weren't just a set of laws.
They were a rule of life for how to survive and thrive in the Roman Empire.
governing everything from how the Thessalonians conducted business to which gods that they honored at the local festivals to whom or what they gave their ultimate allegiance to.
And so when Paul stands in the city and he declares that Jesus is the Christ, he's subverting the very way of life for the Thessalonians.
He stands guilty as charged, turning their world upside down by ascribing to Jesus the titles of Caesar.
Because here's the thing, when you serve a different king, you are naturally compelled to participate in a different kingdom.
And again, verse four says that some of the Thessalonians were persuaded and they joined Paul and Silas.
It's this idea that they were adopted into a new family, becoming citizens of a new kingdom.
And what I love about Luke's description of the family of Jesus is how diverse it is.
Right.
He says that there were Jews who were persuaded and joined Paul and Silas, but he also said that there were a great many devout Greeks and not a few of the leading women.
You see, in the empire of Caesar, you would never see these groups come together.
Right.
There was a strict social hierarchy that kept these people separate from one another, but in the kingdom of Christ, these people are now considered the family of God.
sisters and brothers who would experience a oneness in the midst of their diversity.
And by gathering together in the house of Jason, these kingdom citizens were demonstrating that they would no longer be defined by the borders of Rome, but by the brotherhood of the land, turning their home into an embassy of God's kingdom here on earth.
You see, their ultimate allegiance was no longer to an emperor named Caesar, but it was to a king named Jesus.
and they became a countercultural community that pointed people to a better world.
So first, we see that as witnesses to Jesus, Paul and Silas preach a different king.
Second, we see that they invited the Thessalonians to participate in a different kingdom.
And lastly, they called them to practice a different way of life.
You know, it's often been said that orthodoxy
always leads to orthopraxia.
Orthodoxy always leads to orthopraxia, in other words, believing in the right things will always lead to behaving in the right way.
And so the fact is that believing in a different king and participating in a different kingdom will inevitably lead you to operate out of a different set of decrees.
Because the reality is you can't fully participate in the kingdom if you continue to practice the habits of the empire.
Believing that Jesus is king means believing that Caesar is not.
And so that as citizens of Christ upside down kingdom, Paul calls the Thessalonians to practice a different way of life, to follow the decrees of Christ rather than the decrees of Caesar.
So for instance, when Caesar's decree tells them to climb the social ladder, they are instead to follow Christ's decree to wash one another's feet.
humbly serving others in their midst.
When Caesar's decree tells them that peace is achieved by crushing their enemies, Christ decrees tell them that peace is achieved by loving their enemies.
When Caesar's decree tells them to fear the outsider there to follow Christ's decree to host the stranger, welcoming those who are marginalized and oppressed into their community.
And listen, let me be clear on this.
This is way easier said than done.
There is a real cost to living in this way.
The people in Thessalonica thought that they were crazy for living like this.
It literally says in verse eight that they were disturbed when they heard these things.
See, they thought that these people were fools for placing their hope in a crucified king rather than a living emperor.
And we see this class played out in verse nine when the authorities couldn't find Paul.
They didn't just let Jason go with a warning.
It says that they took money as security from him.
In the original language and context, this was a massive legal bond.
Jason literally had to put his bank account on the line for the sake of the kingdom.
You see, following Jesus wasn't just an intellectual exercise or a spectator sport for Jason, but rather it meant practicing a different way of life.
And we see here that his wallet followed his worship.
There is a real cost to living counter-culturally for Jesus.
And the reality is not everyone will understand.
Some people will call it crazy.
Some people will even call it foolish.
But as Paul reminds us in 1 Corinthians 1, the foolishness of God is wiser than men.
and the weakness of God is stronger than men.
Because the thing is what looks crazy in an upside down world is actually the highest form of sanity.
So as we close this morning, I want to go back to Vidran Smayalovich, the cellist of Sarajevo.
You see, when Smayalovich sat in that cratered bakery,
I don't think he was under any illusion that his cello would be able to stop mortar shells from falling.
See, he knew he was outnumbered, outgunned, outmanned.
But he also knew that their world wasn't the way that it was supposed to be.
He knew that living under the tyranny of death and destruction wasn't how they were meant to live.
And so he sat and he played a different song.
He played an alternate tune that lifted the eyes of the people to an alternate world.
A world where beauty would rise out of brokenness.
A world where oppression and injustice, injustice would not have the final word.
And again, that's my prayer for us as a church, that in the power of the Holy Spirit, we would be able to enter into these contentious spaces and that we would play the music of the gospel.
Because listen, we live in a city that's under its own kind of siege.
It's the siege of anxiety that enslaves us to fear and blinds us to hope.
It's the siege of hustle culture that tells us that we're only the sum of what we can produce.
It's the siege of political tribalism that tells us to hate our neighbors.
It's the siege of comparison that tells us that we're only as valuable as our highlight reel.
or our next big break, or our proximity to power.
You see the decrees of our culture are constantly trying to pull us into the rubble.
The church, we serve a different King.
And as witnesses of Jesus, we are called to be like the cellists of Los Angeles.
We're called to walk into the ruins of our workplaces,
Our broken family dynamics, our divided neighborhoods, not with a weapon to crush or an argument to win, but with a song to play.
Because when we preach a different king, we tell the world that it's the cross and not a sword.
That's the power of God.
When we participate in a different kingdom, we prove that a new family is possible across every divide.
And when we practice a different way of life,
We show our city that following the teaching and ways of Jesus is the pathway to true life and flourishing.
So like Paul and Silas, may we be a people who stand guilty as charged.
May we be a people who are so devoted to our king, so rooted in his kingdom and so faithful in our practices that the world would look at reality L.A. and say, look,
Those who have turned the world upside down have come here also.
And as we continue to play the music of the gospel, we can look forward to the day when an upside-down world is turned right-side up.
Amen?
Let's pray.
God, we thank you for the Thessalonians church that even in the midst of much hostility and affliction we read in the gospel, we read in the books that
The Gospel took root and that these early sisters and brothers of ours would go on to be a launching pad for missions in the ancient world.
And so I pray this morning that we would follow their lead, pledging ourselves to a different king and patterning our lives after a different kingdom.
And in a city that creates and exports narratives, may we be a people who are faithful to tell the greatest story ever told.
And as we proclaim the gospel in word and indeed, we pray that you would renew Los Angeles and that you would receive all of the glory, all of the honor and all the praise that are do your name.
We pray this in the beautiful name of Jesus.
Amen.
Thank you for listening.
For more audio and video content, please visit realityla.com.